---
title: Ethics 05
author: Will Buckingham
pubDatetime: 2025-09-16
slug: ethics-05
featured: false
draft: false
tags:
  - ethics
description: More on Kant and the categorical imperative
---
This is going to be our second close-reading session looking at Kant. Last time, we read the first section from the Kant text, and we asked about what he means by the "metaphysics of morals." What is he looking for? What is he trying to establish? And why?

We'll start by refreshing our minds and summarising our understanding of the first passage.

## Discussion

Going back to the last session's reading (the first passage), discuss the question: what is Kant saying and why? We'll talk about this for about 10 minutes, then report back and make sure that we fully understand this opening passage. Then we'll be ready to move on.

## A close reading of part two

Now we're going to explore this mysterious idea of the _categorical imperative_. What does this mean? I'll split you into small groups to focus on the second part of the reading. In your groups, I want you to read the text closely, and discuss: what, according to your **best understanding**, Kant is saying.

In your groups:

1.  **_Identify_** what you think are the **most important sections** of the reading.
    
2.  **_Summarise in your own words_** what the author is saying in these sections.
    
3.  **_Explain_** why these sections are important to the author's argument.
    
4.  **_Give a practical example_** that can help us understand the argument.
    

To do this, you have to have the text open in your groups, so you can read it carefully, and talk about _what it is actually saying_ (not what you guess it might be saying!).

We'll feed back after the session.

## Homework

Now that we've discussed this, we're going to look at one more text by Kant, and talk about one claim that he makes: the claim that we should **never, ever lie**. It's a fascinating argument. The essay is only five pages long, and is called (in this translation) _On A Supposed Right to Lie Because of Philanthropic Concerns_. I have shared the PDF on Canvas.

The homework is simple. Read the text, then answer the question on canvas: **_when is it okay to tell lies?_**