---
title: Ethics07
author: Will Buckingham
pubDatetime: 2025-09-22
slug: ethics07
featured: false
draft: false
tags:
  - Ethics
description: Immanuel Kant, and the art of Lying
---
## Welcome back

Welcome back. This time, we're going to be looking at our final piece from Immanuel Kant, and thinking about the question of lying. For Kant, there is a moral duty to never lie. If we remember, Kant was seeking moral principles that were always and everywhere true. This solves problems that go back at least to Plato's _Euthyphro_. If we can get hold of a principle like—and properly apply it—then think about how much better it would make life.

And yet... surely there are times when we can lie...

What we'll do today is our usual trick of close-reading. We'll do this in groups. Then, once we have got the basic argument clear in our minds, we're going to explore some of the limitations of it.

## Close Reading

Just as a reminder... these are the rules for close reading. We have five pages to read.

In your groups:

1.  **_Identify_** what you think are the **most important sections** of the reading.
    
2.  **_Summarise in your own words_** what the author is saying in these sections.
    
3.  **_Explain_** why these sections are important to the author’s argument.
    
4.  **_Give a practical example_** that can help us understand the argument.
    

To do this, you have to have the text open in your groups, so you can read it carefully, and talk about _what it is actually saying_ (not what you guess it might be saying!).

## Discussion

We'll feed back to the main group.

## Part Two

Let's think about some difficult cases on the ground. The case that Kant refers to—if there is somebody who knocks on the door and asks for somebody that they are seeking to kill—is something that will have resonances for those of you in contemporary Myanmar/Burma.

So let's talk about this. What **is** Kant saying about lying? And why should we take him seriously?

*   What are the best arguments **_in favour of_** Kant's claim that lying is always wrong? How might you deal with challenges to these arguments?
    
*   What are the best arguments **_against_** Kant's claim that lying is always wrong? How might you deal with challenges to these arguments?
    

## Homework

Next time, we're going to be moving on to explore another approach to ethics. And that is utilitarianism. Maybe we do, after all, need to think about outcomes. This, of course, will come with problems of its own. But let's explore the next text, Jeremy Bentham's _The Principle of Utility._ You can found the link here: [https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/classicreadings/chapter/jeremy-bentham-on-the-principle-of-utility/](https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/classicreadings/chapter/jeremy-bentham-on-the-principle-of-utility/)