---
title: Difference 02
author: Will Buckingham
pubDatetime: 2025-09-03
modDatetime: 2025-09-03
slug: session02
featured: false
draft: false
tags:
  - Difference
description: Thinking through Toni Morrison
---
## Welcome

In this week's session, we're looking at Toni Morrison's first essay in her book _The Origin of Others_. We're going to be asking how the process of "othering" works. In particular, we are looking at how human beings justify treating other human beings as if they are other than fully human, and therefore treating them in ways they would not like to be treated themselves.

## Toni Morrison: Initial Questions

Let's start by introducing our first writer. Toni Morrison was a novelist who was born in 1931 and died in 2019. In 1993, she was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature. The book is developed from the text of a series of lectures that Morrison gave at Harvard on the "literature of belonging" in 2016.

Before we start diving in, what questions did the text raise for you? Let's take 10 minutes to explore the questions on the discussion board. Read through what your fellow students have posted, and respond to at least one question.

## The Golden Rule

You have probably come across the so-called "golden rule", the principle that we should extend to others the same consideration that we would hope or wish should be extended to we ourselves. This exists in various forms in many traditions — Christian, Jewish, Islamic, Buddhist, Hindu and on. So this kind of othering we are talking about is a process by means of which people have justified going against this rule.

We may have certain wishes and desires that we would hope others would take into account — or that we demand others _should_ take into account. But other people, for whatever reason, are not granted the same consideration. Why? How do we allow ourselves to do this to others?

*   What versions of the Golden Rule have you come across?
    
*   Under what conditions does this rule apply? Are there any conditions where it doesn't apply?
    

## Romancing Slavery

Let's get a bit more of an overview of the territory that Morrison covers. In this chapter, Morrison tackles the question of how ideas of otherness are always tied up with the "categories of worth or rank." She explores this idea in the context of the history of slavery, beginning with a discussion of Samuel Cartwright's 1851 book, _Report on the Diseases and Physical Peculiarities of the Negro Race_ (1851). Morrison makes the point that the specific forms that racism (and other forms of Othering) take are learned — i.e. cultural — forms of behaviour.

> _How does one become a racist, a sexist? Since no one is born a racist and there is no fetal pre-disposition to sexism, one learns Othering not by lecture or instruction but by example. (p. 6)_

But it is difficult to sustain this othering. It is a clear violation of the Golden Rule. _We_ wouldn't want to be enslaved, but it's okay that _they_ are enslaved... So Morrison asks how we can accommodate such othering. The answer she gives is this:

> _One of the ways nations could accommodate slavery’s degradation was by brute force; another was to romance it. (p. 6)_

Today, we're going to talk about this combination of _force_ and _romancing_ in how we respond to the other.

* * *

## Discussion

We'll start by looking at the following question in groups.

*   What do you think _romancing_ slavery means?
    
*   In the context that Morrison is writing about, how did this romancing happen?
    
*   Take one group within your society, or a society you know that faces this kind of "othering."
    
*   What examples can you find of _romancing_ as a way of sustaining this othering?
    

Share your findings with the whole group at the end of the session.

## Homework

For your homework this week, I want you to read chapter 2, which is called "Being or Becoming the Stranger." Again, post a brief summary of your thoughts and reflections, **and one question** on the discussion board before 12 am ICT the night before the next class.