---
title: Difference 09
author: Will Buckingham
pubDatetime: 2025-09-29
slug: difference09
featured: false
draft: false
tags:
  - Difference
description: Chie Ikeya and Race
---
## Thinking through race and identity in Myanmar, Thailand and Beyond

We're going to be discussing the paper by Ikeya today. But first, I want you to think about your own experience.

## Opening Questions

1.  What do race and ethnicity mean to you? Do they mean the same thing to you? If not, what are the differences?
    
2.  What race and/or ethnicity do you identify with/as? (think about both လူမျိုး and တိုင်းရင်းသား).
    

3\. In what ways are race and ethnicity significant factors in your own community/communities?

4\. How have ideas of race / ethnicity affected you personally?

After you've had five minutes to make notes on these questions, I'll put you in breakout groups. We'll feed back on the breakout groups afterwards.

## The Historical Development of Race

Let's now discuss the text in more detail. What I want you to do is to divide into breakout groups, and talk about the following questions:

1.  What sections of this paper particularly struck you as interesting or engaging?
    
2.  Did anything in the text challenge your views of the history of race and ethnicity in Myanmar/Burma? If so, what?
    
3.  How has bureaucracy impacted notions of race/ethnicity in Myanmar/Burma, both historically, and more recently?
    
4.  What implications does the historical fact of extensive intermarriage in Burma/Myanmar have for how we think about race and ethnicity?
    
5.  In what ways can Hall's notion of race as a "“floating signifier”throw light on these historical processes?
    

## Homework

There's no homework this time! We're going to have a quiz next time, and an assignment briefing.