---
title: Session 4
author: Will Buckingham
pubDatetime: 2025-09-10
modDatetime: 2025-09-10
slug: session04
featured: false
draft: false
tags:
  - Difference
description: Session 04
---
## **Welcome**

Welcome back. We're going to start with a free writing exercise, using a strange and unsettling sentence from Morrison's beloved. Here is the sentence:

> _This is not a story to pass on._

I'll ask you to write in response to this for 5 minutes. As the sentence itself suggests, I won't ask you to pass this story on, or to share it.

## **Introduction**

Today's session will be relatively straightforward. We're going to talk about chapter 5 of Toni Morrison's book, _Narrating the Other_

In this chapter, Morrison talks about her book _Beloved_, and she also talks about the origins of the book in a real-historical event, narrated by a minister called Reverend P. S. Bassett.

## **Shared Reading**

So we'll start by sharing the reading of Bassett's account. It's incredibly harrowing.

## **Discussion**

NaN. First, talk through the events in the story to get clear about what the text is saying, and what happened.

NaN. What are your first impressions of this passage?

NaN. What does it tell you about slavery in mid-19th Century America?

NaN. Who are the characters you most respond to, and why?

## **Feedback**

We'll talk about this in the large group!

This is the story that Morrison used as a starting point for her book _Beloved_. , we're going to try some more literary experiments of our own. Let's look at the end of the chapter:

> _Narrative fiction provides a controlled wilderness, an opportunity to be and to become the Other. The stranger. With sympathy, clarity, and the risk of self-examination._

## **Writing exercise**

What we're going to do now is to explore this idea, by going back to the passage, and choosing a character to become. Who are the characters that intrigue you or interest you? Who do you find compelling? When you have chosen a character, what I want you to do is write a monologue in the first person, exploring this scene from the point of view of this character.

You have 20–25 minutes!

## **Sharing**

If there's time, you can share your work.

## **Homework**

For next time, I want you to read the final chapter in Morrison's text, which is chapter 6 on _The Foreigner's Home_.