---
title: Difference 13
author: Will Buckingham
pubDatetime: 2025-10-27
slug: difference13
featured: false
draft: false
description: Imagining Burma / Myanmar
---
Today, we're going to finish up with Benedict Anderson. First, I am going to put you into groups to do a _close reading_ of the text.

## Close Reading

Let’s do a close reading of Bentham’s text, as usual. Remember that this is going to be our approach to reading. In your groups:

1.  **_Identify_** what you think are the **most important sections** of the reading.
    
2.  **_Summarise in your own words_** what the author is saying in these sections.
    
3.  **_Explain_** why these sections are important to the author’s argument.
    
4.  **_Give a practical example_** that can help us understand the argument.
    

To do this, you have to have the text open in your groups, so you can read it carefully, and talk about _what it is actually saying_ (not what you guess it might be saying!).

I'm going to get all the groups to report back after the discussion.

## Reimagining Myanmar/Burma

Our final topic is to think about Myanmar/Burma. I'm going to get you to write in response to these questions first, and then to discuss.

1.  What are the cultural and historical factors that have contributed to how Burma/Myanmar is imagined today?
    
2.  What are the problems with how Burma/Myanmar is imagined today?
    
3.  How can Burma/Myanmar be reimagined to better serve the interests of people int his part of the world?
    

## Homework

For your homework, read chapter 9 of Hannah Arendt's _The Origins of Totalitarianism_, chapter 9: [https://www.perlego.com/book/4087260/](https://www.perlego.com/book/4087260/)