---
title: Session 3
author: Will Buckingham
pubDatetime: 2025-09-08
modDatetime: 2025-09-08
slug: session03
featured: false
draft: false
description: Session 03
---
## **Welcome**

Last time, I asked you to read the second chapter of Toni Morrison's book, \_The Origin of Others.\_Today, we're going to try something different. So we won't be talking in great depth about the arguments in this chapter. But we'll be putting into action a strategy that Morrison herself uses to explore themes of otherness: and that strategy is storytelling.

In other words, today's class is going to be a creative writing workshop. We'll be not just thinking about these issues, but _feeling_ our way into them by telling, writing and sharing stories.

In this chapter Morrison tells stories of her own, and also talks about other storytellers, among them Flannery O'Connor, slave narratives and much more.

## **Warm-up exercise**

For a warm-up exercise, I want you us think about a true stories from our everyday lives. These are stories about something — an incident — that happened to us in the last 24 hours. The incident can be something dramatic, or something very ordinary. These are the kinds of incidents I'm interested in:

*   A story about how you sat on a bench, watching the pigeons and drinking coffee.
    
*   A story about a small misunderstanding with your family or friends.
    
*   A story about what happened when you went for a walk in the park.
    
*   A story about going to buy something from the shop.
    
*   A story about something you saw happening in a tea-shop.
    

Think of a story you want to share, and make a few notes about what happened. Think about all the details that matter. What you experienced, what you saw, what actually happened, how you felt, what changed in this small incident. The only rules are it has to be true and it has to be in the last 24 hours.

## **Story sharing**

Now we're going to pair up and share these stories.

## **Extended writing exercise**

Now we've got a taste for writing, we're going to write a more extended piece. We're going to take a quote from Morrison's essay as a writing prompt:

> _And isn't that the kind of thing that we fear strangers will do? Disturb. Betray. Prove they are not like us? That is why it is so hard to know what to do with them. (pp. 34-5)_

What I want you to do is to think about this quote for a few minutes. And think about a story in which two strangers meet. This can be:

*   A true (nonfiction) story from your own experience.
    
*   An entirely fictional story.
    

It's up to you. In this story, one character is disturbed or unsettled by an encounter with a stranger. How do they respond? What kinds of "othering" are going to take place in this story? What events unfold? Make a few notes on who you want your two main characters to be, and where the story is going to take place. Think about the following.

*   Who your main two characters are going to be
    
*   Where the story takes place
    
*   Any other important information
    
*   What happens, or what changes?
    

Now we're going to have 20 minutes writing time.

Afterwards, we'll have a chance to share our writing in groups! Then, if there's time, we can discuss at the end. One question that is raised indirectly by Morrison's text (although not directly) is this: how can storytelling either deepen or address the ethical problems around our encounters with the Other.

## **Homework**

Now that you've had a chance to narrate encounters with otherness, for your homework this week, I want you to read chapter 5, which is called "Narrating the Other". Again, post to the discussion board with your reflections **and one question**, with the usual deadline of 12am, the night before the next class.