---
title: Difference 19
author: Will Buckingham
pubDatetime: 2025-11-19
slug: difference19
featured: false
draft: false
tags:
  - Difference
description: More on Gender in Southeast Asia
---
## Welcome back

In this session, I'm going to give you your assignment briefing for your final assignment. Then we're going to finish off talking about the paper by Andaya.

## Assignment Briefing

Your final assignment is to write a paper. The assignment briefing will be on Canvas (to avoid replication). We'll talk it through in today's class.

## Gender Ideology

One of the important theoretical sections of this paper is the section on gender ideology. So we're going to start with a close reading of this section.

In your groups:

1.  **_Identify_** what you think are the **most important sections** of the reading.
    
2.  **_Summarise in your own words_** what the author is saying in these sections.
    
3.  **_Explain_** why these sections are important to the author’s argument.
    
4.  **_Give a practical example_** that can help us understand the argument.
    

We'll feed back at the end of the discussion.

## Sacredness, Identity Politics and More

The other interesting question is that of sacredness. This is an entirely different discourse about gender than the Westernised discourses of identity politics.

*   Andaya writes, "The direct link between sacred powers and a ‘third’ sex/gender is well established in many cultures, including several in Southeast Asia." What, on your reading, is this link?
    
*   What other examples are there of the relationship between ideas of sacredness and third genders, or other gender identities?
    
*   How do these ideas differ from those of contemporary Westernised notions of gender, and what may they have to tell us about gender?
    

## Homework

We have two more papers to read for this section of the course. We'll start by reading about a Burmese parallel to the _bissu_, and that is the _Nat Kadaw_. Then we'll finish by reading a terrific paper about gender in Myanmar's post-coup context.