---
title: Difference 21
author: Will Buckingham
pubDatetime: 2025-12-02
slug: difference21
featured: false
draft: false
tags:
  - Diff
description: Preparing for the end of semester
---
Welcome to December! We'll take an hour today to discuss the final reading. Then, in the remainder of our classes, we’re going to be workshopping ideas, drafts and our final essays. This week, the classes will be **compulsory**, but from next week, I will ask you to either attend, or to add a progress report to canvas to get your attendance grade. I’ll be in class to offer advice and support. If you want to make use of this, turn up at the beginning of class. If, after 30 minutes, nobody is there, I’ll leave the class!

There’s a lot of work to be done on these essays. But you have a lot of class time to do this work. Together, we have six sessions of one hour and 40 minutes each. That makes **up to 10 hours**.

This is a generous allowance of time to take the pressure off you, and to make this final sprint to the end as easy as possible. But you **_must_** use this time to write your essays. If you don’t, and you leave everything to the last minute, then the responsibility is entirely yours. I will only take extensions in exceptional circumstances. Otherwise, I will drop 4% per day that your essay is late, up to 5 days. After that, I will accept no more late assignments, and you will fail.

## Gender in Myanmar

Your reading was Mra, K. K., & Hedström, J. (2024). “This Bra Protects me Better than the Military”: Bodies and Protests in the Myanmar Spring Revolution. _Journal of Contemporary Asia_, _54_(5), 759–780. [https://doi.org/10.1080/00472336.2024.2344117](https://doi.org/10.1080/00472336.2024.2344117)

We'll talk about this in breakout groups.

1.  What struck you as most important / interesting in the reading?
    
2.  Was there anything that raised questions for you?
    
3.  And the biggest question: what **three** policies would you put in place to build a Myanmar that has more gender equity?
    

We'll feed back after the breakout groups.

## Talking through Your Essays

You've now got feedback on your proposals. We're going to talk through the feedback, and see if you have any questions.

## Homework for Next Time

Get started on your essays! Bring one **question**, **insight** or **idea** to the next class that you want to share.