---
title: Ethics 18
author: Will Buckingham
pubDatetime: 2025-11-18
slug: ethics18
featured: false
draft: false
tags:
  - Ethics
description: 'An Indonesian "Third gender": gender complexities in Southeast Asia'
---
## Welcome back

We're now going to move on to another body of ethical or moral theory, and that a body of theory from Africa. We're going to be talking about Ubuntu. Not the excellent Linux operating system, but the ethical idea that "I am because we are" — and the implications that flow from this.

This follows on nicely from care ethics, because, like care ethics, it sees us as primarily social, rather than being first individuals and only secondarily social.

The paper you read is challenging and subtle. But we'll be working through it today to see what we make of it.

## First impressions

Write in response to the proposition that: _a person is a person through other persons_.

Write whatever you like. A mini-essay, a poem, a song, a story.

## Initial discussion

*   What impressed you most about the paper?
    
*   What did you find most puzzling or unconvincing?
    
*   What did you take away that you found most useful to help you think through ethics?
    

## An introduction to Ubuntu

Before the break, let's watch this short introduction to Ubuntu from the BBC: [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7UojwMiRpNM&t=39s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7UojwMiRpNM&t=39s)

## Thinking through Ubuntu Ethics:

Here are some things that, in the paper, the author says are uncontroversially immoral in Ubuntu ethics, but not in Western approaches to ethics.

*   making policy decisions in the face of dissent, as opposed to seeking consensus.
    
*   making retribution a fundamental and central aim of criminal justice, as opposed to seeking reconciliation.
    
*   creating wealth largely on a competitive basis, as opposed to a cooperative one.
    
*   distributing wealth largely on the basis of individual rights, as opposed to need.
    
*   ignoring others and violating communal norms, as opposed to acknowledging others, upholding tradition and partaking in rituals.
    
*   failing to marry and procreate, as opposed to creating a family.
    

To what extent do you agree with the arguments as to the immorality of these things? If you agree, why? And if you disagree, also... why?

## Homework

Your homework is to have some rest.