---
title: Ethics 03
author: Will Buckingham
pubDatetime: 2025-09-08
slug: ethics03
featured: false
draft: false
tags:
  - Ethics
description: The Categorical Imperative, and questions of duty
---
## Welcome

Welcome to this class. We're going to talk first about the idea of unbreakable ethical rules. Are there any ethical rules (for example, “eating people is wrong”) that we should _always_ and _everywhere_ adhere to? When we have talked about this, we'll move on to talking about Kant in more depth.

Write for five minutes in response to this question: **Are there any ethical rules that we should _always_ and _everywhere_ adhere to?** What are these rules, and why should we adhere to them?

Then I'll put you in pairs to share what you have written. When your partner has shared what they have written, your job is to find **at least one situation where you think your partner's rule _shouldn't_ be followed.**

## Reading Kant

Now, we'll go back to reading Kant. Let's start with an introduction to his work. We'll watch the whole video: [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nsgAsw4XGvU&t=165s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nsgAsw4XGvU&t=165s)

In the text, there are two questions that Kant is tackling. The first is: _how can we think about ethics_? And the second is: _are there any moral laws that we have to always follow_?

I'll split you into small groups. Today, we're going to focus on the first part of the reading. In your groups, I want you to read the text closely, and discuss: what, according to your **best understanding**, Kant is saying.

In your groups:

1.  **_Identify_** what you think are the **most important sections** of the reading.
    
2.  **_Summarise in your own words_** what the author is saying in these sections.
    
3.  **_Explain_** why these sections are important to the author's argument.
    
4.  **_Give a practical example_** that can help us understand the argument.
    

To do this, you have to have the text open in your groups, so you can read it carefully, and talk about _what it is actually saying_ (not what you guess it might be saying!).

We'll feed back after the session.

## Homework

Answer this question on Canvas. Kant writes: "For, in the case of what is to be morally good it is not enough that it conform with the moral law, but it must also be done for the sake of the law." What do you think Kant means? And do you agree with him?

Next time, we'll read the second section of the reading. And we'll start thinking about duties.