---
title: Ethics 14
author: Will Buckingham
pubDatetime: 2025-10-30
slug: ethics14
featured: false
draft: false
tags:
  - Ethics
description: Xunzi on ritual
---
In this class, we're going to be thinking about ritual and cultivation. First, we'll dive into Xunzi's text with some questions.

## Questions:

*   What passages in the text particularly took your attention (e.g. because they interested you, because you disagreed with them, because they puzzled you)?
    
*   What do you think Xunzi means by "ritual"? Give some examples.
    
*   Xunzi says: "If their lives are without ritual, then people cannot survive." What does he mean, and is this true?
    
*   What is Xunzi's example about the lame turtle and the six horses saying?
    
*   What is the connection between ritual and education for Xunzi?
    

We'll share in the main group.

## The Secular as Sacred

If we have time, we'll look at Herbert Fingarette's Confucius: The Secular as Sacred. TH

Ritual maps:

Sketch a map of ritual in your own lives. You have 15 minutes.

*   Identify and document rituals from your own lives (morning routines, greeting customs, digital etiquette)
    
*   Analyze which aspects of these rituals might cultivate virtues like respect, discipline, or mindfulness
    
*   Create a visual map showing how daily rituals shape character traits (you can do this any way you like)
    

## Ritual Design

Now, finally, I'm going to put you in groups, and ask you to design a **new ritual for Parami** that might help us all develop virtue. This can be online or offline. Think about:

*   the precise virtues you want to develop
    
*   what the ritual will be
    
*   the practicalities of how the ritual will take place
    
*   how this ritual can develop or support this specific (or these specific) virtues.
    

## Homework

We've talked about virtue ethics, about utilitarianism, and about deontology. For your homework, we're moving on to talk about another tradition of thinking about ethics: the ethics of care. I'll share the reading on Canvas.