---
title: Ethics 20
author: Will Buckingham
pubDatetime: 2025-11-25
slug: ethics20
featured: false
draft: false
tags:
  - Ethics
description: Revision and starting to think about applying our ethical theories
  to real-world problems.
---
## Welcome

Welcome back. Today, we are moving on to think about putting our ethical knowledge to work. But first, we are going to discuss the final paper.

## Final paper

Your final paper proposal is due at the end of the week. I'm going to give you some time today to think through and discuss how it's going. I'll put you into breakout groups to discuss, and then we'll have a chance to talk through in the main group.

## Revising our ethical theories

You have looked at five ethical theories:

1.  Deontology
    
2.  Utilitarianism
    
3.  Virtue ethics
    
4.  Care ethics
    
5.  Ubuntu ethics
    

> Which of these approaches to ethics speaks to you most directly? Which of them do you find least appealing? Why?

## Putting Theory to Work

Think about these five questions:

*   What do we do about environmental destruction?
    
*   Is it ever okay to kill other human beings?
    
*   Should we eat meat?
    
*   What is prison for?
    
*   What are the ethical problems with AI?
    

I'll put you into five groups at random, one for each of these topics. In your groups, I want you to think about your assigned topic in the light of our five theories.

*   Which of these ethical theories most effectively help us think through the issues here?
    
*   How do they help?
    
*   Can you give an example of how these ethical theories might throw light on some of the issues we confront.
    

## Homework

Your homework is to finish your final paper proposal.