---
title: Ethics 03
author: Will Buckingham
pubDatetime: 2025-09-08
modDatetime: 2025-09-08
slug: ethics03
featured: false
draft: false
description: The Categorical Imperative, and questions of duty
---
## Welcome

Welcome to this class. We're going to talk first about the idea of unbreakable ethical rules. Are there any ethical rules (for example, “eating people is wrong”) that we should *always* and *everywhere* adhere to? When we have talked about this, we'll move on to talking about Kant in more depth.

Write for five minutes in response to this question: **Are there any ethical rules that we should *always* and *everywhere* adhere to?** What are these rules, and why should we adhere to them?

Then I'll put you in pairs to share what you have written. When your partner has shared what they have written, your job is to find **at least one situation where you think your partner's rule *shouldn't* be followed.**

## Reading Kant

Now, we'll go back to reading Kant. If you remember, there were two questions that Kant was tackling. The first was *what is a moral law*? And the second was *are there any moral laws that we have to always follow*? I'll split you into four groups. The first two groups will discuss the first section I gave you to read. The second two groups will discuss the second section. After discussing, I will get each group to present their **best understanding** of what Kant is saying.

I want you to stick closely to the text. So open up the text on your screen in your groups, and read it carefully. If you claim something about the text, make sure you know which section you are referring to.

Once we have feedback from the two groups, we'll move on to look at some of the philosophical problems in the text in more depth.
